---
title: Why Strategy Still Matters, Especially in the Time of COVID
author: 'Wendy Geller'
date: '2022-02-23'
slug: strategy-still-matters
categories: []
tags: []
---

# Why Strategy Still Matters, Especially in the Time of COVID

People are tired, there seems to be a new logistical hurdle pretty much every
day, and I think I'd be remiss if I didn't acknowledge that a lot of us are
scared. I know my husband and I are. Our son is 14 months old as of the time
that I'm writing this post, and the vaccine for under five year olds is still in
the works. This is a hard place to be for all of us and the systems we support.

But, I also think it's times like these that call us to think differently about
how we do things. Sure, there's the urgency we all feel to "just get things
done" but when we cede too much ground to reactivity, when we're repeatedly
asked for more, without knowing what that more is doing, where it's helping us
go, or what it's helping us address, it can feel like just another withdrawal on
our already scant remaining reserves.

That doesn't help us dig a little deeper. It doesn't help us take a breath, get
still inside, and think clearly about how to address a tough problem. It doesn't
make us feel connected to the work as a part of how we're trying to do something
larger than getting through the task. Ultimately, I think sustained periods of
reactivity create and then press on a sore spot. Actually, it probably jabs at
that sore spot.

It's also risky from an operational standpoint, especially in terms of morale
because it amplifies stress, diminishes coherence, and pushes us further towards
burnout.  It's risky from a reputational standpoint, because it increases the
likelihood of mistakes or lack of communication, which can erode trust in our
work and our relationships with colleagues and stakeholders, both internal and
external to our organization.  It's also risky from a legal standpoint,
especially when working with sensitive data.

So, with the amount of uncertainty that we're all living with day to day, I
don't think we can afford to let reactivity become the norm. I believe we can
navigate through reactivity in a productive way if we don't sideline our
commitment to prudent, strategic thinking. I believe that if we hold the course
in pursuing our strategic goals while folding the "just-get-it-done" work in
with the longer term efforts, then we maintain our awareness of "where north is"
and we build a sense of coherence.

If we hold space to think about the long run, to invest in how we measure and
communicate about our progress towards our goals, and spend time making
connections between the urgent "quick, we need this" types of work and the
larger, longer term efforts as we execute them, there is room for us to find
some calm. There's a chance to practice using the systems and behaviors we're
trying to adopt so as to get us where we're trying to go, and to feel not just a
connectedness to our work, but to take heart in the progress we're making
towards the leaner, more efficient, robust systems we're trying to achieve for
our organizations and our stakeholders as we advance data science in the applied
environment. So, in the midst of a context that's continually asking us to
react, let's not abandon strategy. In fact, let's double down on it and use it
as a map to a better, more sustainable, and more data-informed place.
