---
date: "2019-06-01"
title: About the Authors
---

### Wendy I. Geller


As Director of the Data Management & Analysis Division, I serve alongside my Work Family of Data Scientists as a centralized resource to the Vermont Agency of Education. My crew collects, stewards, and leverages the institution's critical data assets to create and share data products that enable empirically-based practice and policy decision-making.

We lead, partner with external bodies, and execute on the analytic activities of the institution as well as plan, develop, and manage the data governance program and the business side of the DataOps continuum.

My Ph.D. (2011) is in sociology from the National University of Ireland Maynooth (www.nuim.ie) where I was a doctoral fellow at the National Institute for Regional and Spatial Analysis (www.nuim.ie/nirsa). My dissertation findings highlighted shifting demographics in education arenas and labor markets internationally, specific education orientations occurring across cultures, and presented thoughts on the social and spatial forces surrounding rural community viability.

Since leaving academia, I’ve dedicated myself to creating the cultural, infrastructural, and operational conditions needed to care for and use data sustainably so as to provide value-added analyses in the public sector.

My specialties include DataOps generally, data governance, data privacy, applied research, program evaluation, social policy, management, and developing functional relationships with IT/kind-of-being-part-of-IT-but-not-really.

### Dorothyjean (DJ) Cratty

As an independent research consultant, I conduct applied student-level research for and with state
and district agencies, policymakers, and stakeholders, and help states and districts develop their
collaborative research programs. I advise states and districts as well as their university research
partners and grantmaking organizations on collaborative data analytic methods for their researcher
practitioner partnerships (RPPs). And I conduct research with education data aggregates for national
organizations, such as EdTrust.
 
Currently, I lead the education data audit stage of DC’s aspiring collaborative research center,
with Data Ethics LLC. Previously, at AIR, I led the development of Rhode Island’s cross-sector
Research Hub. In other work, I built out North Carolina’s cross-sector research capacity as the data and
methods specialist on an interdisciplinary research team at Duke University.
 
As a program officer for the NCES Statewide Longitudinal Data Systems (SLDS) grant program, I worked
with state agency data and research managers to help develop and share best practices for applied
research with administrative data. These practices included crafting research agendas, drafting data
sharing agreements, documenting data inventories, training analytic staff, and presenting rigorous
research to lay audiences.
 
My training is in labor and public economics. I’ve worked with raw administrative data to research
state workers’ compensation reforms, CTE and adult education programs. Prior to working primarily
with state and district administrative data, I did applied research with survey data for various
countries and sectors as an economist at the World Bank.
 
[My Duke statewide education research papers with copious data prep and analysis details are available in the footnotes for those interested.](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/cf_dev/AbsByAuth.cfm?per_id=1589079)


### Jared Knowles

I currently serve as the founder and president of [Civilytics Consulting LLC](www.civilytics.com), 
the data science
consulting firm I founded in 2016. Civilytics serves clients at all levels of government in policy
areas such as K-12 education, higher education, policing, and taxation. Before founding Civilytics,
I worked for 6 years at the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. There, I pioneered an
award-winning machine learning algorithm that is used across the state to help struggling students
get back on track. Since 2012, this work has been used around the country to improve the accuracy of
predictive analytics systems in education. 

My work has been published in several peer-reviewed journals, including the Journal of Educational
Data Mining and Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. I received a Ph.D. in Political Science
from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2015. My dissertation investigated the untapped
democratic potential of school board elections and the conditions under which school governance in
the United States becomes democratic. You can read all of this work [here](https://www.jaredknowles.com/phd-research).

Now, through Civilytics, my work focuses on building the capacity of public sector partners to
sustain analytic products after the initial work. By using open source software and open data
sources, providing all source code and extensive documentation, and excellent training of customers
in the product, Civilytics ensures that its clients can maintain products developed long after the
contract ends. This sustainable partnership model is unique, allowing agencies to build lasting
organizational change. Civilytics approaches projects with a human centered design methodology that
creates lasting partnerships with clients.

